welcome back to let your language
processing we're going to continue our
sequence of segments on semantics by
focusing this time on first-order logic
so so far we looked at propositional
logic which as I said is essentially the
simplest form of logic some of the
properties of propositional logic
include some pause its compositional we
can define the truth values of long
sentences based on the tools values of
their constituents it's declarative but
it also has cons it has very limited
expressive power and it can only be used
to represent facts so if you want to go
beyond that we have to go to something
called first-order logic which has a lot
of additional properties that
propositional logic doesn't have so
first-order logic is used to present
everything that propositional logic and
represent but also things like objects
so an object can be so for example mark
in the cat relation for example Martin
and Moses are brothers functions
Martin's age and so on okay now let's
talk a little bit more about first-order
logic in BNF format we have this basic
concept of a formula so formally it's
one of the following things either an
atomic formula or two formulas connected
with a connective or a sequence of
quantifier variable formula or a
negation of a formula or a formula in
parenthesis an atomic formula is a
predicate that consists of one or
multiple terms in parentheses the
predicate is something like likes and in
this case lines can have two arguments
the person doing the liking and the
person being liked a term is either a
function of terms or constant or
variable connectives are either and or
or implies quantifiers are either the
universal quantifier or the existence of
quantifier a constant is either
something like M or a name of a person
or name of an object variables are
denoted with variable names like X and y
you can also have predicates for example
likes and eats functions for example
age of color of and so on so the two
common mistakes that people you make
when they use quantifiers I want to
explain how the quantifiers work very
well the first mistake is that people
don't realize that implies is the main
connective with Universal quantifier so
the mistake that people make instead is
to use and as the main connective so let
me give an example if we say for Oh X X
is a cat and X eats fish well this is
actually not the right representation if
we want to say that all cats eat fish
what this really says is that everyone
is a cat and everyone eats fish which is
not what we wanted to do is that what we
need to say is that for all X cat of X
implies is fish X so the second mistake
has to do with the existential
quantifier so the who is that end is the
main connective with existential
quantifier so the mistake that people
make is to use implies instead of end so
here's an example suppose that we want
to say there exists a cat who eats fish
this representation here actually is
incorrect because as I said before in
the implication operator if the
left-hand side is false then anything
can go on the right-hand side so what
that means is that the statement the
exists on X cat of X implies it's fish X
this statement will be true if there
exists anyone who is not a cat because
for that personal object the right-hand
side doesn't matter at all so the
curricular presentation here would be
they exist on X such that X is a cat and
X eats fish so a little bit more about
first-order logic I'm going to now
introduce an aquaporin from 2014
written by banking which illustrates
some of the interesting aspects of
first-order logic
so the problem can be downloaded from
the Nakhla website and i'm going to show
it you here you're quick so the problem
is called Bertrand and Rosso
again this is a pun on the name of the
famous philosopher and logician Bertrand
Russell so the first page describes
first-order logic this is some
we already did in this class and then it
explains the different connectives
negation conjunction disjunction and
implication and then the two quantifiers
Universal and existential quantifier and
then it asks you some questions you have
nine or ten formulas 8j and each of
those has to be matched to one of the
five sentences above so the first
sentence is everyone either passed or
failed the test so can you figure out
which letters A to J go to the five
empty boxes in part h1 and the answer
will be shown to you in the next few
slides the second part of the problem is
to translate now logical expressions and
first-order logic into English language
sentences so again the goal here is to
find which of the letters a to H going
to the five boxes on the top of the page
and here finally the solutions for both
parts 1 & 2 make sure that you get them
right and if you didn't get them right
go back and try to understand better how
first order logic works so the next
thing that I want to introduce in the
section is the concept of a lambda
expression so I'm going to do it by an
example suppose that we want to define a
function called increment X which takes
an argument X and returns the value that
is 1 above so X plus 1 so the way to
represent this in lambda notation is to
say that there is a lambda function
which has one argument X which returns X
plus 1 so if we apply this function
lambda X to the argument for we can
essentially write it in the following
way increment 4 is the same as applying
the lambda function lambda X X plus 1 to
the argument for and the result of
applying this function to this argument
is the number 5 you can have lambda
functions even with multiple arguments
so for example for sums we can have the
add lambda function be represented as
lambda X lambda Y returning the saw
x plus y so if we now want to compute
the sum of the numbers 3 & 4 we can do
it by applying the lambda function of
two arguments lambda X lambda Y X plus y
to the two arguments 3 4 and then we can
have this expanded further in two
different ways we can either first
expand lambda X or lambda Y in this case
I chose to expand lambda X first so by
removing X we can replace the expression
with the two arguments with a new one
lambda Y three plus y this lambda
function has to be applied on the
argument four and that gives us 3 plus 4
or 12 so a lot of the expressions are
going to come in very handy in the next
few sections